Hi,
Apologies. Foreign Affairs
Is just
Finishing estimates.
Uh, well, welcome to, um, members of the welcome to the Honorable Janti,
uh, and to visitors in the gallery. Uh,
we have a, uh, matter of privilege that was, uh,
referred to us by the speaker. Uh, and, uh,
we, uh, sent you a letter, uh,
setting out the, uh, the proceedings of the committee. Uh,
the proceedings of the committee are being recorded.
We can take a decision later as to whether we transcribe them. Uh,
and we now embark upon a series of questions from members,
uh, as to the issue that is before us, Michael Woodhouse. Oh,
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. I, uh, Mr. Chair,
I did ask if I could make a statement to start with.
Fine,
No problem with that. Members.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Members,
I wish to make a brief statement at the start of this session regarding the
matters we are discussing today. In your letter to me, on 1st of June,
the committee asked me two primary questions. The first question asked,
when did you know that the information in your answer to a supplementary oral
question in the house on the 22nd of February, 2023 was inaccurate?
My staff verbally informed me following question time on the 22nd of February
that some staff in my office did in fact discuss the timing of the release of
attendance data with the Ministry of Education.
I understand now that I should have informed the House as soon as I learnt this.
Sorry, we're just having a wee bit of difficulty hearing. Are the mics,
or perhaps could you
I'm having difficulty hearing you too,
So, right. Okay. Well, I will speak
Up. Might speak
Up. Yes. I think we might
Can, do you want me to start again, or are you right from that?
Fine, just fine.
Just a bit louder. Okay. I'll use my teacher voice
And slower. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Tanti. I understand now that this,
that I should have informed the house as soon as I learnt this.
That was an error of judgment on my part that I regret deeply.
The judgment I made at the time was that I did not need to correct my answer
because I felt that my answers reflected what I intended them to mean at the
time of delivery. I fully accept that this was an incorrect judgment to make,
and I corrected my statement at the earliest opportunity after Mr.
Speaker's letter to me on the 1st of May, confirming this,
the second question the committee asked was,
did you intend to mislead the house in admitting to correct the inaccurate
statement until 2nd of May, 2023?
My answer to this question is an emphatic no upholding the integrity of
parliament is of utmost importance and something that I take very seriously.
Again,
I made an incorrect judgment on this occasion about whether I needed to correct
a statement or not. I regret that decision, while not an excuse,
it may assist the committee to provide an element of context.
The 22nd of February was the first day of question time for 2023,
and was also my first question, time as Minister of Education.
I received no other oral questions on the matter of the timing of the release of
the data between that date and the date.
I corrected my answer on the 2nd of May.
I didn't give enough consideration to the matter on that day.
I came straight from question time and straight into meetings.
I made a judgment not to correct my statement and then got on with my role as
minister.
I was not being regularly prompted on this issue as I was not being asked
further oral questions on the matter.
The committee has asked a further clarifying question regarding the context of a
statement in my letter on the first OFN 2023.
Felt that my answers reflected what I intended them to mean at the time of
delivery,
that the release of attendance data is conducted by the Ministry of Education.
My answer reflected my understanding at the time that I personally played no
role in the delay of the release of attendance data. As I have mentioned,
I subsequently learned that this was not the case and that my office had
discussed timing with the Ministry of Education.
Can I end by reiterating that I accept that I should have corrected my answer
in the house earlier? As Mr.
Speaker pointed out in his letter on the 1st of May,
I regret this era of judgment,
but wish to underline to the committee that there was absolutely no intention to
mislead the house. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Courthouse first. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for attending Minister. Um,
take us back to that era,
that period after question time on the tw 22nd of February.
And just talk us through what happened when you got back to your office.
Staff came to see you. What, what did they say to you?
I was verbally told about the emails at that point in time. Um,
it was a very quick, and I have to emphasize this,
it was a very short period of time,
probably five minutes maximum that I had in those discussions.
I talked through, uh, with them about those emails.
I s we had this discussion around the fact that it didn't alter the intent of
what I meant of what I said in the house. I then went into meetings.
I didn't think about it again at that point in time.
So did your staff advise you that it was their view that the answer that
you gave was inconsistent with what actually had taken place between the
20th of December and the 21st of February?
There were a range of views that were canvased on the matter.
The advice to me was not definitive. Ultimately. Now,
I believe it does not matter as it was my decision,
and I stand by the fact that I was the one that took that ultimate
responsibility, um, to not correct the statement at that point in time.
Uh, because I felt at that time that, uh, I was still,
meaning it was still meant what I meant it to mean in the house,
and that I now see as an error of judgment.
I did not give enough consideration to the matter on the day.
So it was a pretty binary question with a very direct answer.
Can you explain to the committee why you still maintain, uh,
albeit that you are now saying that you understand that you should have informed
the house, but in your, uh,
le reply to the letter from the chair of this committee,
and you've said it again today,
that you felt that your answers reflected what I intended them to mean.
What did you intend them to mean and, and
given that the reality was so different from your answer?
I intended them to mean that the data does belong to the ministry.
And while there are discussions that I had at that time,
that it is the ministry's ultimate decision about when they will release the
data, I now understand when I have seen,
and that took some time for me to see the contents of that email.
I did not see it that day. Another decision that I regret at that point in time,
that I did not look at it right at that point in time, uh,
that I carried on with my meetings on that afternoon to. So,
you know,
there's a lot of decisions that I made then that I do ultimately regret at this
point. But I did think that, uh, no,
ultimately it was the decision of the,
the ministry and so that the ministry were making the final decision.
So I did not have a say over that data. This is not statutory data.
Uh, it is, uh,
released due to the ministry's timeframes. That's what I believe.
I will also say that, uh,
I was disappointed in the emails when I did finally see them,
uh, that were written and sent.
That overstepped my expectations for my staff. But again,
ultimately it doesn't matter about that because I was the one that made that
decision and I take full responsibility for it.
So, so if I may, I'll come to those emails in a minute, but,
but I just wanna clarify on after question time, on the 22nd of February,
did your staff advise you that it was their view
that you should correct your answer?
The advice to me was not definitive.
So,
but it was clear to them that the answer you had given was inconsistent with
what had actually been going on between your office and the ministry.
A range of views were canvased on the matter,
and the advice that they gave me was not definitive. Ultimately,
it was my decision based on the, the, uh,
range of views that were given to me at that point of time that I still stood by
at that point in time, my answer. Right.
But, but that, did that range of views include advice to you?
Because you're telling the committee, this was the first time you'd heard of it,
that they had in fact, uh,
been corresponding with the ministry in a manner that would, um,
indicate that they were having some influence on Michael? Could
I, sorry, excuse me. Can you just repeat that again? So
You said that there were a range of views.
I'm trying to understand what advice you were given.
You said there was a range of views.
Did that range of views include advice that your
answer was in,
in inconsistent with what had actually been happening in your office?
And how then can you say that your answer still reflected
what you meant them to mean?
When you sit down and, and Michael, um, excuse me, Mr. Woodhouse,
you know how an office works and you know how minister's office works,
that you'll sit down and have that conversation. Again,
the timeframe here was a very, very short timeframe that we are talking about.
We had that conversation, a range of views were given at that time,
but I came to the decision based on the range of views that were given to me,
that my answers still stood at that point in time. Again,
a decision that I ultimately have come to regret.
At. At what, at, at any time after the 26th, you said you were an,
you went to a meeting, that's fine. At any time after the 22nd of February,
did officials or staff approach you on this subject?
Uh, and when was the next time the question of whether the answer to,
to an oral question time on the 22nd of February was correct.
When was that next discussed in your office?
I didn't think about it again until I saw the o a that came through.
Uh, that came through on,
I think it was about the 11th of April that I signed the OIA out. I,
uh, at that point, it was the recess, the three week recess.
I was on a trip or going to a trip, ministerial trip to Ottawa and Washington.
Uh, and then didn't have any opportunity to talk about it with my staff.
Uh, when I got back the day before I came down,
or the day that I came down to Wellington, the letter from Mr.
Speaker was already with me.
Okay. I can help you out.
The OIA A was signed out by you on the 5th of April on the 11th. Yep.
And it contained email correspondence between the ministry and your office where
the ministry stated, we are keen to work with you to agree a release date.
And your private secretary replied, fyi,
the minister's office are looking to potentially release the term three
attendance data early next week.
Something we can chat about at our meeting later today.
Are those the sorts of email exchanges you are saying? Uh,
you read and realized then that your answer, uh, was, was
I read those at the o a A at that time and you asked,
you originally asked about when I had thought about it again.
Yeah, that's right. Was
That point when I signed out the,
Okay, so what about that exchange
did not cause you to pause and think?
Actually my answer didn't reflect reality because you, you,
you basically said you didn't think even then that it was necessary to correct
your answer.
Well, I couldn't have corrected my answer at that point in time.
For what reason? Recess. Oh, okay.
I will come to timing of that. Um,
the, the email,
the oia also included email correspondence on Tuesday the 14th,
or, alright, actually I'll come to the 14th in a minute.
Are you telling the committee that you realized that day that
the answer was needed correction,
but because it was recess you couldn't do it at that time?
No. I'm not saying that.
I'm saying that it gave me pause to think at that point in time,
but I would've had a conversation with my staff when we got back to the full
office again, which was going to be the 1st of May.
Okay.
Can you talk us through the conversation that took place then on the 1st of May?
Well,
That's what I'm saying to you, Mr. Woodhouse,
that that conversation didn't quite go the way we expected because I got a
letter on the 1st of May from Mr. Speaker.
Alright. Um,
on the, uh,
4th of May,
you told the house that you only became aware your answer was
incorrect when the speaker wrote to you,
but then twice the following week,
you told the house that you knew straight after question time on the
22nd of February.
So, which I knew which
Of that is
Correct. I knew about the, um,
emails on the 22nd of February cuz I'd had a verbal discussion.
But that's where I made the decision at that point in time that I still stood by
my answer when Mr. Speaker wrote to me on the 1st of May,
that was where I, uh,
realized that I had made a mistake and that I had to correct that answer
straight away when he pointed out standing orders to me.
So wasn't it equally given the conviction you had up until that point, uh,
plausible reply to the speaker, that in your view,
your answers did reflect, quote, what I meant them mean at the time of delivery?
And that even having, um,
considered whether or not that was inconsistent with,
with what had been going on in your office?
So you're basically saying to the committee,
you only changed your mind on that once a a letter came from the speaker.
And bear in mind, that wasn't the letter that triggered this, uh, the,
this referral.
Sorry, I didn't get that first part of your question. I didn't,
couldn't make the connection between the first mark part and the last part.
You've effectively said, I I I've con confessed to making a mistake because the,
the speaker told me I'd made a mistake,
but the speaker made no such determination at that point.
He had just pointed out to you that there had been a complaint about this,
But he also pointed out standing orders at that point in time as well in that
letter.
So you're saying neither your staff nor you knew about standing orders and the
obligation to correct any mislead
Statements? I just,
I want to reiterate the timeframe of when I got back into my office was
very, very short. Again,
I regret that I didn't give enough consideration at that point in time
to the answers that I'd given. Right. I made a snap decision.
I now take that, that was the wrong decision to make. I,
uh, I regret that I didn't take more time. I went straight into,
after the first question time, I had a full afternoon of meetings.
I did not think about it again.
Okay. But so I, I just wanna work through the logic here.
You had a co you were, you are aware of standing orders. You, you've,
you've been around a about that you know,
that questions that are misleading or found to be misleading need to be
corrected. You had that conversation.
You made a determination that you stuck to effectively even after signing
out that OIA that you did not believe your answer was misleading. Why?
What happened?
Because the minute the speaker didn't give you any more information, in fact,
you would've had much more information about what happened than he did.
Why was it, why did you move so quickly to say,
clearly I did mislead the house?
Because you could actually have replied by saying, no, I stand by my answers.
My interpretation of the speaker's letter might be quite different to your
interpretation. I feel,
I feel that the speaker's letter did give me quite a few direction around the
fact that I needed to correct that answer. I,
I take on board what that letter said. I, uh,
take on board that I feel that perhaps at that point in time that I
understand now that my answer was inaccurate. As I said,
I abs in my opening statement and a few times since.
I absolutely regret the fact that I didn't give more consideration to that
answer at the time.
But you can see the difficulty we've got now because
there were two complaints to the speaker.
The first one was not upheld because you then went
and corrected your answer. It's now clear
that
you knew or should have known much, much earlier than that,
that your answer was misleading and that your staff were donkey deep in
the question of when the data would be released,
would not administer looking at the
obvious information, if not on the 22nd of February,
but certainly on the 5th of April would have known or should have known
that the answer was, was well wide of, of the mark,
Which is one of the reasons why when I signed out the oia,
that I started to think about that,
but wanted to have a good conversation with my staff before the
2nd of May when the house would've been sitting again.
Okay, so that same OIA had email correspondence dated Tuesday,
the 14th of February with a ministry, emailed your office asking,
do we have a sense of when the data will be released, i e this month, next week,
et cetera.
And a reply to that email from your office stating the plan is to release
it. The plan is to release it after the announcement,
and that announcement is scheduled for Thursday.
So Friday would be the day that's your office telling the ministry
what was going on.
Is there any other conclusion that could have been reached reading that,
that email correspondence that your staff were acting outside?
A definitely influencing the timing of the release,
but acting outside your knowledge and authority.
Look, I,
I've said I do set clear expectations around what is acceptable by my staff.
And this clearly, clearly overstep the mark.
I have had discussions around with my staff around what I do
expect, and I am really disappointed this has happened. But ultimately,
as minister,
I accept responsibility and I deeply regret that I didn't
give more consideration to this at the time.
I do want to reiterate that the timeframe that I was dealing in was around five
minutes maximum to make that decision. I deeply regret that decision.
One minute. Keep going. Yep. Okay. So I've got,
I want to turn to another oia. Um, and I'm,
I'm trying to kind of draw threads and, and weave a,
a rope here. Uh, o a a 2023 dash oh five two,
the respondent to a request for correspondence between the Minister of
Education's office and the office. Uh,
any staff in the Prime Minister's office relating to the release of turn three
10 starter, um,
contains an email,
which looks to be from your office to pmo,
although the redactions make it difficult,
its subject is re attendance at pre-budget request
under the subject. When is the term four data out?
I think that might be a typo,
but the answer is term three Data was due out last year,
but didn't go for a variety of reasons.
We'd ideally like to time the release of the data carefully with an
announcement. So I have three questions about that.
Did you read that when it came out?
No.
Do you di it's the only line in the oia it wouldn't have been difficult to read.
What do you mean? For the oia? Yes, I signed the OIA out,
but I didn't know about it at the time.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you. That's understood. Um, was pmo,
sorry,
in in the subject line attendance re pre-budget request,
were you asking for the Prime Minister to attend the attendance data
announcement on the 21st of February?
Not to my knowledge, no.
Okay. What was the request for attendance? Uh,
pre Budd for a pre-budget announcement.
Attendance starter. Pre-budget announcement.
Okay. So it's, it relates
To attendance data? It's not about attendance. No. Okay.
Very good. Um, what, what,
if any discussions did you have with
either the Prime Minister's office or the office of
the Minister of Education when you were the associate minister about the
timing of attendance starter release?
I didn't have any conversations with the Prime Minister's
office around attendance data when I was associate minister.
I can remember one meeting that the then education Minister was at
where ministry gave us a Ministry of Education,
gave us a, um,
no surprises around when they thought that they would be releasing the data, uh,
for term three data that would've happened,
I'm going to say early December from recollection,
but I cannot remember that, um, the exact date.
But that would've been the only time that I can recall
that the previous Minister of Education would've been in on that conversation as
well. Okay.
Your reply to, sorry, I'll rephrase.
The Prime Minister's reply to written parliamentary question
13 8 32,
around communications is probably referring to the same
30th of January email,
but his answer is on 30th January, 2023,
my office was advised by the office of the Minister of Education of an
intention that the release of the turn three attendance staff from 2022 be
aligned with the announcement of the school attendance turnaround package.
So I just wanna put it to you that it's
inconceivable to me, at least as a former minister,
that the correspondence on the 9th of February, on the 4th of February,
on the 30th of January, in, uh,
between the 14th and the 23rd of December,
all referring to the minister's officer's involvement in an influence
over the timing of the release without your knowledge
is simply not plausible.
Well, that's exactly how it happened. Uh, as I've said to you,
I set my expectations around my staff.
I'm very disappointed in how this has overstepped the mark.
I have since had a conversation with my staff around making clear what my
expectations are. Having said that, as the,
as the minister, I do take responsibility around this,
but you must also know that as a former minister and how these things operate
is that there are a lot of conversations that happen between a minister's office
and P m O every week that the minister will not be privy to.
And in this particular case, I wasn't privy to this,
But they're all informed by the items that appear on the weekly
agenda that the minister sits down with the department to discuss.
So are you saying this matter did not appear on any of those agendas,
uh, between the, the late November, uh, and, uh,
the 22nd of February,
Mr. Ley? I haven't seen that.
Are you're telling us that all of this was going on and you didn't know about
it?
I did not know of those emails. I did not know about that correspondence.
Yeah, the, the emails are a consequence. The issue, what's at stake here? Oh,
Do you mean the attendance staff?
What's stake here is what you do and what you didn't tell the house.
So there's a difference between, uh,
informing the house and a difference between misleading the house,
and that's what this committee's trying to, to sort out. Sorry,
Mr. Brown. The question
Is, the question is, uh,
are you saying that you did not know there were any discussions going on
that might link the term three data release to, uh,
an announcement about the, uh, the new 74 million package?
I genuinely did not know when that announcement was going
to be made. No, that's not the question. Uh, not the announcement, sorry.
When the data was going to be released. That's not the question. I genuinely,
I'm sorry. Then can you clarify your question? I,
Are you telling the committee that you were not aware that there was
discussion about the linking of the release of both the
data and the announcement?
Yes.
You didn't know about either those things?
No. How
Can you be functioning as a minister with what you respect? No. Well, that's,
you dunno about that. Well, that's, uh, it's not, not for this committee. Well,
well, no, it's, it's a perfectly fair question. It's,
it goes right to the heart of it because, um, the question here is, did the,
when did the know that had been a,
a mis a potentially misleading statement made to the house? That's what's,
that's what's at the hu So what I'm getting at my
somewhat incredulous view that, um, a minister,
when something like this is, is going on, it's clearly important.
The 74 million announcements, big deal. Right?
And so you're looking at, uh, uh, when's the optimum time for release? Uh,
you talking to other ministers, presumably, uh, it's all being set up.
The PMO will be involved, uh, the whole deal. Um, so the idea that there wasn't,
uh,
an awareness that there was also this other data that we're gonna drop the day
before. Uh, this does not, this doesn't gel.
Can I just say then, Mr. Brownie, that my focus was on the data itself?
That was the most important part. And the whole lot of this conversation,
the data itself is what informed him.
When we've seen the early data of what's informed,
all of the data going forward has informed, uh,
interventions that we've put in place. So the focus has been on the data itself,
and that was what my focus was on,
around what can we do to make certain that we are getting our young people back
and engaged in scope,
not the release states or the mechanics of the house. That was not my focus.
My focus was on the data itself.
That's, that wasn't what, that wasn't what my question was about.
No, but I answered your first question.
You're not aware of or not picking up the importance of what was being Well,
that's a value statement. Do you want to ask a question? Well,
the question would be, uh, when the pro when the, uh,
uh, policy or the 74 million, uh,
truancy program was being put together,
was there at that time,
any discussion about the term three, uh,
attendance data
As in the release of,
there's always been discussion around the term three release,
the attendance data, not the release of it,
but when the package was being put together, some of the, and,
and here's a pointing case, when you look at the part of that package,
which was about 7 million, to make sure that the data is robust, um,
we know that data pre from the term three and prior to that data wasn't as
robust as what it could be to ensure that it informed us of the best practices
going forward. So, of course,
the term three data and prior to that had been discussed in helping inform
that package, but not linking the two with the release.
Okay. But can
I, the clear point is that, um,
the data you received on the 14th of December and then sent back to
the Ministry and then received it again on the 20th of December was according to
io, largely unchanged.
But the position that the ministry understood was that it could not be released
until they had authority from your office.
And isn't that backed up by that also being the belief of the Prime Minister?
At the time,
The data on the 14th and the 20th of December was not in a good shape
at all. In fact,
it was very hard to interpret that data and to ensure that we had
the best data that could make the biggest difference for our young people,
which is what I'm saying on my focus was on the data itself,
not on the release of the data.
I asked some clarifying questions about that data, particularly around,
uh,
the fact that the data was blowing out because of illnesses
due to covid and flu illnesses at the time.
But that wasn't reflected in the way that that data had been brought together.
Those were the clarifying questions that I was asking so that we could make the
most of that data have it in the most robust form possible.
So, Jen, Um, I mean,
get getting down in the weeds of data and so on a bit.
I just wanna get back and clarify some of the information you've
given. And obviously what was said in the house, um,
is the starting place and its accuracy and your view of its accuracy.
Um, it strikes me that there's two statements that you made in the house.
Um, one is, um,
the Ministry of Education are responsible for the release of the data.
Um, and the second is that, um,
you have no say over the release of the data. Um, and I think we,
but you know, for the record, so to speak,
I think we all accept that you believe those two statements to be absolutely
true when you said them, that, yes. Yeah. Um,
and the question that I think, uh,
we've been in inquiring into here is when you reached
the conclusion that in fact, that wasn't accurate,
and there seems to be a number of junctures that that could have happened,
but may or may not have happened.
The first was when you returned to your office, um, and had a,
what you call a brief discussion with staff. Um,
is it fair to say that when you had that discussion,
you still considered those to be an accurate statement? Yes.
Yes.
There was then a series of, uh,
interactions around documents being released that you signed off under the
Official Information Act, which had, um,
exchanges between your staff and Ministry of Education,
which I think you've said you saw those documents when you signed them off.
And when you signed those off, that didn't,
did that didn't change your mind that the statements you made in the house
remained accurate?
No, but I started to think a little bit more, but no, I didn't change my mind.
And then you, you had an exchange with the speaker,
which is captured probably in your letter of 29 April, uh,
where you recount the various
exchanges. Um, and at that stage,
it appears to me that you still were of the view that those statements remained
accurate. Was that your view when you wrote on 29 April?
Yes. Yes, it was at that point in time.
And the,
the next document is the letter of one made from Mr.
Speaker. Um, and I mean,
in a sense that looks to me like the speaker's telling you you are wrong.
Is that how you saw it?
That's how I saw it at that point in time.
And so, w would it be fair to say that when you received that letter,
you essentially accepted the speaker's ruling, um,
that your previous views about accuracy were incorrect and you,
and that's the first point that you reali realized you needed to correct
something in the house? Yes.
Okay. But, um, may I, yeah.
Have you got anything?
Ask a few questions. Um, uh, Mr.
What I take from the,
the basic story you're telling is that you gave this answer on
February 22nd, you returned to your office,
you had a brief discussion where you learned, uh, for the first time,
you tell us that your staff had indeed been involved in interfering in the
timing of the release. However,
the relationship between that information and your answer given was ambiguous.
And as a result,
you decided to move on and didn't think about the matter until you heard from
the speaker. Is that, is that basically the, well didn't
Think about the it again until the oia a until when I signed, signed out
The yellow.
So that time delay explains why you didn't correct your answer in a timely
manner, which is the issue here. Um, I just wonder,
when you had that discussion with your staff, um, did you review the,
the video or the draft hand side of exactly what had been said? No,
I didn't. And that's the part that I deeply regret at this point in time. I,
I went straight into meetings. I didn't think about it again.
I deeply regret that I didn't go back through the handout and I didn't go back
to review the video.
Can I say that I've changed that practice now that I do go back and,
um, look at those, those videos in the handout?
Because you, you, you were asked,
can you categorically state here in the house that you played no part
in the delay on in the, of the release of the information,
and you replied, I already have. It's a decision for the Ministry of Education.
Mm-hmm. So you, you were saying you'd, you, you,
you'd already categorically stated you played no part. Mm-hmm.
And yet a few minutes later, uh,
you found out that your office had played a part. Now,
surely that contradiction would've been glaring
Again, this is where I deeply regret that I hadn't gone back and given more
consideration to this time because my meaning was around the fact that I hadn't
that, uh, two parts that I hadn't personally, I hadn't been involved in that,
but also that it was still,
because I didn't look at that email and give consideration to it,
that the ministry, uh, still were making that determination themselves.
I now accept having seen that,
that my staff overstepped the mark and that, and, um,
I deeply regret that I didn't give that due consideration at the time.
So it was worth having a discussion, but not looking at what was actually said.
Because when you read it now, it's crystal clear, categorically state,
you played no part. You said you had, but you'd also played a part.
It was, it was partially because of that timeframe that I had,
which again, I might even be, uh, framing five minutes is too long.
It was a very, very short time to get there and into the next meeting.
Because I mean, I guess this committee's interested in how,
how seriously you take the house. Uh, and it sounds like not that seriously,
very
Seriously, which is why I've changed practices around them.
Can I ask one more question? I mean, you frequently say that you're a,
I think it would be fair to say a passionate educator, a former principal, um,
and yet you were meeting as minister at least weekly with the Ministry of
Education for months.
And the topic of when this data would be released never came up. I mean,
surely you would've a intense interest and when this school attendance data
would be known to the public.
Um, no, that's not what I've said either that,
that I said around the back, even I think early December,
the year, uh,
year before that the ministry had said in a meeting and talked a bit about
release of data, um,
they did talk early 2023 about the fact that
the data was delayed,
the final copy coming to my office because of, uh,
the cyclone and the weather events that they weren't able to get that
final copy coming through to my office. Um,
and at that point I accepted that,
and I didn't hear any more about that from that point.
So the only time in,
in several months of meeting weekly with the ministry as the Minister for
Education as a passionate educator,
was that you discussed the timing of the release of attendance data for the
whole education system.
The release of data
Was, was when that was, when there was, uh, a, a,
a question of the storms interrupting. The, the
Release of the data wasn't the focus, the focus was on the data itself.
It's the data itself that's going to give us the richness about how we can make
a change for our young people in this country. Not the release of the data.
The release of the data is something that the year before, uh,
had been not released until May. So it wasn't,
it wasn't something releasing it even in February was something that wasn't
unusual to be sort of really pushing in and saying, where is that data?
Where is that data? Because it was actually ahead of time by that logic,
because of the year before. This is data that, um,
that is quite new for the Ministry of Education.
It's only since about 2018 that, uh,
we've been collecting data across all four terms. Prior to 2018,
it was only collected across one term. And even then it was a backfilled data.
So it was only on a one week, uh,
timeframe that that data was collected from schools and it was a paper trail
that schools had to fill that data in. This is something quite new,
and that's why refining, which is the
Greatest of respect, I think most of us know that. The basic history game. No,
Don't think most people do know, but yeah, that's
Side. Well, well, well, I do and I'm sure colleagues do. Like,
can I just get back to one final question? Um,
you've said that you know an answer to a question. You,
you categorically haven't been involved in the delay of the release of the data.
You also say that you've been intent to intensely involved
in how the data is presented and whether it's accurate and whether it includes
children who were absent due to covid 19 isolation.
How can you say that you're not involved in the timing of the release,
but also deeply interested in what the data said before it was released?
Well, you've really answered your own questionnaire,
because my focus was on the data and what the data says,
not the release of the data that was inconsequential.
That's not going to make the difference. Sorry for our young people. Sorry,
Can you clarify that,
that you are saying that the release of the data is inconsequential
For me to
The
Sector? For me it is. So
For me to make
Worry if
It
Wasn't released. Bob,
this is an interesting point that you are saying that it would make a difference
to the sector. Yes, it does.
But the sector already knows that data cause it's their data. Oh,
Well, well, well, your, your purpose is to assemble it in one place. Yeah,
that's
Exactly
Right. And you're saying exactly right to
Give us a system
Overview.
You're saying you took an intense interest in the format and quality of the data
before it was released, but you didn't influence the time of release.
That that just doesn't quite add up.
Well, no, hang on. Clearly I've said here that my office did, um,
that data came to us on that final data and final analysis came to us on the
10th of February.
The data was released on the 22nd of February.
That six working days between the 10th of February and the 22nd of February.
Clearly, the emails show that my office did, um,
influence that timing around that. Uh,
but my personal focus was on the data itself.
That data that came in on the 10th delivery was in a much better state than the
data that I saw in. But, but
December, you, you, you, you, you indicated categorically that you,
you weren't involved in the delivery,
but you were also intensely involved in the preparation of the data and
presumably signing off if it was of equality that you, uh,
thought was acceptable to release.
So I don't see how those two things can be consistent.
I can understand what you're trying to say. That having signed it off,
you didn't then, uh, uh, require a, a further delay,
which we now know was also not true. Um, but it seems that given what you knew,
that you'd be an intensely involved in this data for weeks,
if not months prior to answering the question,
that you must have known that the answer couldn't possibly be true.
At least enough to go back and check the tape or ask a staff member to check the
handout and just be sure about that. If, as you say,
you take Parliament very seriously.
First thing, Mr. Seymour, I don't sign the data off.
I did not sign any data off. I asked questions in December of the data,
but at no point did I sign the data off.
I didn't ask further questions after the 10th of February.
So the ministry then went through and worked on that release
of the data. Having said that, um,
I stand by the fact that I deeply regret that I did not give more
consideration in that time to looking at the hanard or at the video or
at Indeed at the emails themselves.
It is a decision that I deeply regret.
Well, thank you for answering my questions.
Are are you, are you saying that that, uh,
when the announcement about the, the, the 74 million package,
uh, was made on 22nd?
21st? 21st,
Okay. That, that you had, uh, no knowledge that the,
um,
delayed data or term three would be released the,
the same day or the next day.
I had no absolute knowledge that it would be released at that time.
I was hoping that the data would be released at some stage very soon.
Then why is it that in all of the evidence that you have released, uh,
that so many education officials and the Prime Minister's office were
of a, of a view that they were waiting for you to approve the release?
I did not approve the release of the data.
Well, that, that's not the question I'm asking you to,
I, I dunno the answer to that. I did not approve the release of the data.
Dunno why.
In
Discussed the fact that they were talking with the PMOs,
the PMOs about this relationship. The,
The minister does not approve the release of that data.
We get that. We understand that that's not the question. Can,
can I ask a coup uh, uh, follow up, follow up for that? Because, uh, Mr.
Brownley has quite rightly pointed out your significant
interest in the two three data from the 10th of December to about the
26th of January. And that's laid out in the correspondence.
Um,
putting aside my confusion about the difference between knowledge and absolute
knowledge of the timing of the release, which was the answer,
just given the committee,
you've said you didn't influence,
but given all of this interest by you in the data and its
context,
is it your submission to the committee and all of the activity that's going on
behind your back without your knowledge?
Is it your submission to the committee that you did not even
ask? Hey,
the Deb SEC said it would be re on the seventh of dec December to the Education
Committee on 7th of December. It's coming out really soon. You,
you asked for some context all the way up to the Christmas break.
You got back from Christmas. Did it not cross your mind to simply say,
why hasn't the term three data been released and when might it be released?
Mr. Woodhouse? I think I've already said that,
but I did ask that earlier in the year,
but I was told that it was delayed because of the weather events.
I did not ask after that because I thought that the delay was due to the weather
events at that point in time.
Okay. So now we're saying for all of the stuff that's going on,
the cyclone delayed the data and it was just a coincidence that it went out
around the time of the, uh, pre-budget announcement.
Sorry,
We've just told the committee the cyclone delayed the,
the data release and it was just a coincidence that it happened to coincide with
the pre-budget announcement.
Well, clearly now that's not the case. Clearly.
Now you can see from the emails and I saw, and
I'm talking about your involvement,
My involvement,
You must have thought that was, uh, a somewhat interesting coincidence.
Well, I was hoping that the data was go, excuse me,
that the data was going to come out soon at that point in time, cuz this, that,
you know, when the data does come out,
it engages people in the conversation about getting our young people back into
school and engaged in schooling.
And ultimately that's what I'm concerned about is how,
how do we focus on the data and how do we get people to take the data seriously,
right? To make decision where we're acting on those initiatives.
So when were you informed of the timing of the release of the data
and how did that information get to you?
Uh, think that I was told,
and I'm going back in my recollection here, so I'm,
from what I can remember,
I think I was told on the morning of the 22nd that the data was going
to be released that day that the Ministry of Education were going to release.
So you told the AM show on the morning of the announcement on the 21st that the
data would be released that day. Yeah. When were you informed of that and how?
Uh,
I genuinely didn't know when I was, um,
when I was interviewed on the AM show.
I genuinely didn't know when the data was going to be released.
Well, you seem pretty confident in your answer. Yeah,
It was a, it was, again, that was a pretty instant that I thought, well,
it must be coming soon. So I I sort of connected the two in my head with
Respect. Minister, there's a big difference between soon and quote, uh,
that day.
Yeah. Well it wasn't that day, was it? Um,
Um, thanks Thomas. Uh, okay. Look,
I want to come back to a couple of answers. You've, I just go, oh, sorry.
Thank you. Thank you, minister. Um, the, uh,
question we are examining is about intention, intention to mislead. Um,
one of the comments that you made was about the ability to have the prompt
to, uh, then correct the answer. Um,
and there is a period of time from the the question in the house
to the first opportunity, I guess, to prompt which you motivated as the,
um, the o uh, help me to understand,
um, what your thinking was when,
when that is obviously the first indication to you that there,
there may be something to answer here.
Help me to understand your thinking or the advice or what, what,
what happened at that time, um,
which meant that you didn't continue along that line of thinking to then,
uh, uh, perhaps make a, a different decision at that time.
Cause I think we are talking about a sign significant period of time from the
time you answered the question into the,
in the house to when Theia was signed out by you. I'm quite keen to know,
um,
Between that time.
Yeah, between that time and, and then at that prompt what you were thinking was,
So from that time, I genuinely did not think about it.
So I came back that day. I got on with the work of being a minister.
Uh, did not think about that again at that point,
which is the point that I now deeply regret that I did not take more
consideration coming to the oia.
A I signed out the O A a I wasn't happy with what
I saw in the O I A. That was the first time that I had seen that, um,
information coming through.
I wanted to have a conversation with my team around it. Uh,
at that point I was preparing for a ministerial
visit to Ottawa and Washington. Didn't have the team together,
wasn't able to have that,
was going to have that conversation when we got back on the 1st of May.
Um, actually I arrived back the day before the 1st of May,
came to Wellington that evening. The 1st of May was the Monday, I believe.
Uh, and that's when the speaker's letter arrived. So that was what prompted,
and that was the conversation that I then had with my staff that said that
clearly I accept that I have got this wrong, uh,
uh,
took responsibility for it and prepared to correct my answer at the beginning of
question time when the house, uh, sat again the next day.
Michael, I wanna go. Oh, sorry, Jerry, you ask yours then I'll card again.
Would you like a question
Ask? Um, Yes, I do have a question. Um, I think, um,
I'm interested in knowing,
you've said that you've changed processes a few times,
and to my mind you've said that you regret, um,
not informing the house more promptly,
not not looking at the emails when you learnt about them,
and also obviously not knowing about the emails at all. So I think, um,
I'd like to hear what you've changed in terms of the processes in your office.
Cause I think that goes to what you've identified as,
as being things that have gone wrong in, in your view, in good faith.
But
So I take a lot more care now. I make certain that I read the hand sad.
I make certain that I do watch the video. Uh,
because sometimes in those situations you'll hear a word
wrong.
And there was a recent time that I did hear a word wrong in a question,
and I came back and corrected it that evening because of my answer.
Didn't my answer matched in that particular case,
matched the wrong word that I'd heard,
but didn't match the way that it had been asked.
So I did read the hand side and I did look at the video around that.
I do make certain that my staff engage in question time a lot more
carefully as well. Um, and then I've also, as I said,
I have reminded my staff about the fact that that
particular email chain did overstep the mark and that that is not
my expectations around, uh,
what they should be doing and the difference between the department's
operational side and how a minister shouldn't have, uh,
any influence over that.
So those are discussions that we have as ongoing as a team as well to make
certain that everybody's upholding those standards. But question time,
really spending a lot of time on it now.
It's really changed my processes around it.
Michael? Yeah, we have a,
a document here that you've released under the part, your bundle of documents.
You'll see it's very heavily redacted. Um,
it's got two blocks in it that are noted as outta scope,
but the bit that's lefted in says, when is the terms pour data out? Do we,
do we really think cameraman should be photographing across the shoulder? Well,
that's your choice. We should, we shouldn't be doing that.
And Michael made that point at the start, so please don't carry, carry on.
Gerry, uh, the book that's Underacted, it says,
when is the two four data out?
And the answer appears to be term three data was due out last year,
but it didn't go for a variety of reasons.
Remember the data date this January, and then it says,
we'd really like to time the release of the data carefully with an
announcement. Now who's that? Who's that from?
Mr. Woodhouse has already asked this question.
Yes. And it's
From, from I Look, I, for the benefit of the committee,
I think it's useful to have the full quote, which Mr. Woodhouse said before.
It's from the advisor that said in that, um,
email term three data was due out late last year,
but it didn't go for a variety of reasons.
Would ideally like to time the release of the data carefully with an
announcement that heavily reflects the covid and winter illness infection rates
at the time.
Yeah, that's fine. The question is though, uh,
have you just told us this was your advisor?
I just said that
Talking presumably then to the ministry?
No, to P M O
To the Prime Minister's office. Yeah. So
Not the ministry. Why, why would
Your advisor who comes, uh,
who be able to say that we'd ideally like to release the data
carefully with an announcement when, uh,
you are saying there'd be no discussion about the relationship between the
announcement and the data.
Because saying in an email to PMO that it would be ideal for the data to be
released at, uh, the same time as an announcement is quite different,
directing the ministry to delay the data.
The words are, we'd ideally like to time.
Now that means in my head that the,
the advisor at least thought that there was some, uh,
arrangement coming together around these things. Uh,
is this relevant to this
Question for
Us? Yes. It's, it's because, um,
if in fact on the 30th of January, uh,
it was known by the minister or at least the minister staff
that there was, uh, some arrangement being put in place, uh,
to announce the data at the time of an announcement,
then it would make the question that was answered on the 22nd of,
uh, January wrong.
Say that bit again, sorry. Um, I,
that last bit that you said then about the 22nd of January totally wrong.
Can you just explain,
I was explaining to, uh, your, um, colleague over there that, um,
uh, why I was asking the set of questions wasn't relevant to the question.
The question still remains, uh, what,
why was your advisor under the impression, uh,
that the,
that your office had influence in the release of the data?
I don't believe that that quote does say that there's influence over the data.
It is saying,
saying that ideally we'd like to time the release of the data carefully with an
announcement that would be ideal in many situations.
It's not saying that there's a direction to the Ministry of Education
Discussion about that. So what was,
was your people sitting up there sort of, uh,
anxiously hoping that just by some coincidence, the data that the,
the OIA make very clear the ministry wanted to release prior to Christmas
would just be held onto by them until it was announcement? No, that's an,
that's suggesting that the ministry is involved in political activity. That's
Not good. No, that's not what that suggests at all. That's your interpretation
Of that.
Well,
I think it's quite clear really that they're saying that we want to make certain
that people engage with the data.
It would be ideal if we could get people engaging with the data and assignment,
but I was unaware of any of these emails at the time. Yeah,
but this is to pmo, this is not to the ministry.
Uh, that's correct.
Yeah. So this is not a direction to the ministry.
The,
the PMOs impression in the answer that they gave the written question that Mr.
Goodhouse, uh, uh,
spoke of before was that they understood from the minister's office that the
release would be timed with the announcement. So it's, it's,
it's inconceivable, uh, that we should be constricted to, uh,
some sort of discussion about what the,
the words here might mean with clearly the overall impression has
to be that there has to be a discussion.
What I can tell you, Mr. Brownley,
is that I was not part of any discussions around that at that particular point
in time.
And what I can also tell you and reiterate is that I deeply regret that I didn't
take more consideration of the question of my answer after question time on the
20.
So all that husband, are you saying that you never, ever, uh, uh,
said to any of your staff or any of the ministry staff, uh, where's the effect?
Wouldn't it be great if these two, uh, announcements lined
Up? No, because my focus was on the data itself, not the release of the data.
Can I quickly ask you,
you probably know that this committee has to determine what actually happened on
the balance of probabilities. Now, on the balance of probabilities,
if you've got an advisor writing to the PM saying,
would it be ideal to timeless?
That's not to the PM by the way,
To the pmo, uh, then, you know, I, I think what, what,
what sort of conclusion would you like this committee to draw other than, uh,
your advisor,
someone in your office you are responsible for was trying to manipulate the
timing of the release for political reasons?
I don't believe that that's what that quote says, Mr. Seymour.
It absolutely does not say that. It really is pointing to the fact that
Really
Highlight Can I just finish? Thank you. It really is highlighting that the, uh,
the data is,
is something that we need people to engage in any way that we can get that data
highlighted. And I don't mind discussions around attendance data.
Cause if it can get people engaged in that data,
then that has to be a good thing. So
What would you define as an announcement in that, in that sentence,
and how would an announcement help people get engaged with the data?
Well, clearly announcements is about what we can be doing as a government,
but I was not privy to those conversations. Mr. Seymour. Okay.
I am focusing
On going an hour, which is what we've said. Downstair, you've had 50 minute,
more than 50 minutes of questions. Uh, on the opposition side,
I think we've gone into all of the issues that relate to what the minister knew
when, uh, and what she believed,
what she thinks her mistake was.
And I suggest it's now fair to close the evidence.
Well,
that corollary that there are a couple of important questions that perhaps would
put the minister in writing. Well, I could ask.
That's that's a, that's a discussion for the committee. The, the evidence.
No, you, you won't close off the hearing of evidence from the minister.
Uh, yes I am because it was set down for an hour. Uh, I, you know, you can,
you can try and, uh, pretend that, uh,
this is an unfair process that has been not No, no, no, we're
Not. What're just saying there is a, there's a process.
Well, you wouldn't be sitting there if it was a fair process. But anyway, uh,
uh, we'll leave that aside. Why you wanna close it off? Why can't
Remain, I object to that. Mr. Brown. Could, could you please a chair reflect,
could you please reflect on that, uh,
imputation that you just made on the chair?
How do you start to reflect?
You said it wouldn't be,
I wouldn't be sitting here if a fair process was being run. Well, that is not,
that is, are you,
are you suggesting that the way I have chaired this meeting is unfair? No,
I'm not. Thank you. Right. Thank you. Uh, Mr.
No, I was just gonna say the chair is right. The agreement was one hour.
We've done one hour and that's, that's fair.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.